Welcome to session 121.
You know, performance is an important
consideration for all of us.
And at Apple,
we're certainly doing our part,
working hard to improve the performance
characteristics of Mac OS X.
Many developers have told me that
They've seen measurable
performance boosts in their
Carbon apps running on 10,
but we know there's always
room for improvement.
And so it's my pleasure to introduce the
manager of the Advanced Mac Toolbox team,
John Iaroci,
to tell you about how you can improve
your performance running on Mac OS X.
Welcome, John.
Good afternoon.
Perhaps you've noticed there's been
a little bit of an undercurrent,
a theme here throughout the
conference on performance.
And basically,
a lot of that revolves around
A realization at some point,
you've carbonized your app,
you've taken advantage of
some of these latest features,
and you're comparing
your app on 9 and 10.
And you realize, gee,
this part of my app is slow.
Why is it slow?
And there's been other talks that
have kind of gone over the high
level description of why it's slow.
But basically,
we've seen time and time again,
as more and more people
bring Carbon apps to 10,
that there's this basic
assumption that certain code,
certain code paths, certain calls,
will have the same compatibility
on OS X as they do on 9.
We looked at all of the
APIs going into Carbon.
We studied them carefully.
We knew right up front that there were
several APIs that just would not be--
[Transcript missing]
Before I actually get into some
of the specifics in this session,
I just want to mention that this session
is coming ahead of the tools talk,
7:05, which is later on,
5:00 this afternoon.
And this session is going
to refer to tools that are
described in depth in that talk.
Ideally, we would have actually been
able to schedule the sessions,
[Transcript missing]
And finally,
there's no one answer for performance,
and there's going to be all
sorts of different performance
problems with your apps.
So look to other sessions as well,
some of which have already happened,
for tips on performance in your app.
Okay, so these are the topics that
we're going to go through today.
And they're pretty
much ranked in terms of
The way I would prioritize them for you.
If you're only going to do one thing
with your app regarding performance,
I would definitely look
into application launch.
I'd highly recommend the first three,
going through launching,
file system usage, and CPU usage.
That's where you're really
going to get a lot of payback
in terms of the time you put in.
But all of them have interesting
performance benefits,
and I really would encourage
you to really try to get
performance into your planning,
into your scheduling,
and into the way you develop your app.
So let's start with application launch.
Perhaps some of you are
familiar with the bouncing icon.
The interesting thing is that
sometimes it bounces quite a lot.
Sometimes it doesn't stop bouncing.
There are pretty good reasons for that.
First of all,
the bouncing is there as visual
feedback to the user that
something is actually happening,
that a launch is occurring, right?
Some very legitimate reasons why the app
may take a long time to launch is perhaps
the app is actually off on some network
volume and the network is sluggish.
Perhaps it's on a disk that is spun down.
It may be on a CD drive.
There's real legitimate answers to some
of these launching performance problems.
But those aren't really interesting and
they're not really under your control.
They're kind of environmental.
The ones that we really want to
talk about today are the things
that you can do something about.
So when talking about app launching,
I like to refer to two
different kind of launches,
two different environments
in which you launch your app.
The first one being a cold launch,
and the second one being a warm launch.
Cold Launch is your app
launching on a bad day.
Everything is going against your app.
All the files that it has are not readily
available or cached in the system.
All the memory that it needs has
to fight for some of that memory
if some other app is using it.
This is kind of a worst case scenario.
And it's actually-- it's an extreme
that you're not really likely to hit
as the system is actually being used.
But what we do is we mimic this.
A simple way to do it is to
basically write a tool that
allocates all of physical memory,
then touch that memory,
and that will flush out all the
memory that's in the system,
and then see how your
app launches after that.
That doesn't quite cover all of
it because there are cases where,
even though the memory
is no longer cached,
you actually potentially have
files that have been cached in
the file system and other kernel
objects that affect the performance.
So it's actually hard to get to
your real worst case scenario.
Warm Launch, on the other hand,
is basically things are
going well for the app.
The libraries that you
depend on are all loaded.
They've already been instantiated.
The best case is basically it's an
app very much like yours or another
instance of your app has just launched.
And the reason I distinguish between
the two is because they're really
different in terms of how you optimize.
And the biggest point is the
cold launch is predominated by
what I would call low-level I/O,
and I'll explain that in a little bit.
So my challenge to you is to get your
warm launches for your typical app,
and this will vary depending on the
memory and disk and configuration,
to launch in one bounce.
There are apps on OS X that launch
in one bounce in this situation,
and there's plenty of improvement
for even the apps that we've
shipped in the first release of X.
The other thing I would encourage
is two measurement techniques
that help constrain or help give
you boundaries as to how fast
or how slow your app can launch.
The first one,
what I refer to as the Do Nothing app, is
Take your application,
and the very first thing you should do,
right after, in your main entry point,
is just put in exit to shell.
Leave everything else the same.
Exit will work as well.
What you're trying to do here is launch
an app that basically does nothing.
But not just any app, your app,
with all of the libraries
that it depends on.
Everything else is the same.
It's just you're not executing
any coded initialization.
I think you'll be surprised when
you actually measure that with
either a stopwatch or any of the
tools that we have on the system.
I usually use, for this case,
I usually use the time
command at the command line.
It's an interesting data
point because it's--
When you first look at it,
that's your best case, right?
And a warm launch when you just
do absolutely nothing at main,
that's as fast as you're going to get.
Well, actually that's not quite true.
Because before main is run,
there is other code that runs that
you actually have some control over.
Particularly, there's the init routines
of your libraries that you
pull in that execute code.
There's the init routine of your
app itself that executes code.
And the third major category is,
Static Initializers for C++.
These three areas are things you
definitely have to look at because they
contribute to your best case scenario.
You haven't run any
code in the app at all.
So you may be doing things in your
static initializers that you just
don't even remember you put there,
right?
So make sure you take a look at those.
So that's the do nothing app approach,
and that's a good data point to capture.
The other one is more like the best case,
just to kind of get an idea
of how good things could be.
And there I would just recommend that you
basically have a very high end system,
as much memory as you can put in it.
Make sure that absolutely
nothing else is running.
Take it off the net.
Launch the app once, launch it again,
measure it.
Those are two boundaries that
you should keep in mind as you do
performance analysis of your app.
And what you should be doing
as you improve your application
launch performance is see how you
can get those two to converge,
essentially.
I'm not actually bringing up
or talking at length about some
more conventional techniques that
you are already familiar with.
The whole area of perceived
performance is something that
you might also want to look into.
I'm talking about real-time performance.
I'm talking about clock time.
There's still definitely advantages to,
for example, putting a splash screen up.
Ideally, you'd want to put your first
window up as fast as possible,
and if you can't get that to be
a second kind of granularity,
maybe a splash screen is in order.
Some feedback.
Oh, the other thing I forgot to
mention on the bouncing icon.
The bouncing icon starts when
you double click on your app.
It stops when your application
is handling events.
So if you're doing a whole bunch of
other stuff before handling events,
you're not able to respond to events,
that's going to tie into this.
It's going to tie into how it's
perceived that your application launches.
It also is going to tie into how when the
user can actually use your application.
And then there was one other
thing on the bouncing app,
is it will time out
after some absurd time.
And then at that point,
the user isn't quite sure if the
app is actually launched or not.
Okay,
so in looking at launch performance,
I was able to profile
two word processing apps.
This is a typical profile
of an untuned app.
You can see the time is
dominated by low level I/O.
By that I mean the virtual memory system,
paging, the dynamic loader,
doing library loading,
initializing libraries
for the first time.
This is largely completely
out of your control.
This is something the OS takes care of.
But the other two sections
are really interesting.
That being the file I/O and
the CPU time during launch.
By file I/O, a typical example of file
I/O is when you're actually
going and reading preferences,
maybe you're enumerating plug-ins.
That's the kind of file I/O I mean.
On the CPU side of things,
it could be as simple as determining,
you know,
maybe you've read your preferences in
and now you're sanity checking them.
Anything that's typically compute bound.
Now,
what's interesting here is those two,
file I/O and CPU time,
compete with the lower level I/O.
The ideal case,
we minimize the file I/O and
CPU time and we can make a much
better use of low level I/O.
The other thing that sometimes shows
up in untuned applications is pauses.
By that I mean either an explicit call
to a call like delay or a sleep call,
left in accidentally,
left in to work around some bug.
Those are kind of hard to detect.
Usually you have to see that
basically the app is running,
but it's not doing anything compute
intensive and it's not doing I/O.
There's a couple tools that I'll
get into a little bit later that'll
helped find these kind of problems.
The other anomaly we see sometimes
is writing during launches.
There's really no good reason that
your application has to write to
the file system during a launch.
Now I'm not talking the first
time your app ever launches
on that system for that user.
It's perfectly okay to go ahead and write
out your preferences for the first time,
but statistically speaking,
your typical launch should not
have any file system rights.
The reason for that is first,
writes are much more
expensive than reads.
And the whole launch facilities,
the low level I/O has
optimizations for reads.
It's basically geared at reads.
And a write right in the middle of that
will interrupt it and will essentially
discard some of the optimizations.
Here's the profile of a tuned app.
Now both of these are what I refer to,
what I explained before as a cold launch.
This one you can see has a lot
more low level I/O and that's good
because that's the best case for us.
We can optimize that into the largest
chunks of I/O that we can do and we
can do them as efficiently as possible.
And of course,
the file I/O and the CPU are
minimized in this case.
If this were a worm launch,
all that low-level I/O would go away.
You might see some more compute cycles,
but the profile is quite
different for a warm launch.
Okay, so what does that mean?
For both cold and warm launches,
you should concentrate on
CPU usage and file system usage.
That's the areas that'll
pay back the most.
The best way of doing that is
first do only what you need to do.
Look at what you're doing in
the launch of your applications.
If it's the typical app,
you're probably initializing a whole
bunch of stuff that you may or may
not use during the life of that app.
Look at deferring some
of that initialization.
This might be a very good use of
setting up a Carbon event timer to
send yourself a one-shot timer to
defer some of this initialization.
Or don't even do it when the
app is up and running events.
Do it when the user first uses
that feature of your application.
Particularly if the feature in question
is a somewhat optional feature.
I'm not saying it's a
bad feature or anything.
I'm just saying if your typical user
base isn't going to use that feature,
why pay for it?
Why pay for it up front
in your initialization?
Then the second speed-up tip I would
have for you is eliminating some of
these things that you see during launch.
Just outright eliminating.
Writing and pausing of some sort,
that's a good example of that.
Dead code.
Make sure your tools are
working for you in this regard.
I'm talking about dead code that,
you know,
may be in there for debug reasons,
may be in there for
whatever reasons you have,
for tracing, profiling, things like that.
Make sure that that doesn't
end up in your final product.
Just a little bit of code sprinkled
around means it affects your locality,
means that code that would
not be on the same page.
Code that should be on the
same page would potentially
be split up across two pages,
and that can make a difference.
Then there's another kind of dead code
that I would encourage you to go after.
That's the dead code that
you've inherited over time.
Now is the time to get rid of that
kind of code that's checking to
see if Quickdraw supports color.
No need for that anymore.
You probably still have
the check in your code.
You probably still have the code
base that supports that check.
At least,
pound to find that out of your app.
And then of course, redundant I/O.
And that shouldn't be understated.
Redundant I/O is where you
can actually get a lot of
time back from your launches.
And now I'd like to
bring up Nitin Ganatra,
who's going to go through some of the
details of file system performance
and help with that redundant I/O.
OK, it's on now.
Good afternoon.
So as John mentioned, redundant I/O,
and in fact, any kind of file I/O,
is a big burden on clock
time of your application.
Doing anything to get rid of
this file I/O or minimize it at
launch will pay off immediately.
And it can either pay off at least
minimally in reducing system call
overhead in the best case scenario
where you've got buffer caches that have
got your data and they're already hot,
all the way to if you're reading
something off of a network disk and
you solve because it's on a network.
So here are the areas
that I'd like to cover.
First is file iteration, metadata,
volume iteration.
Well, actually, no.
You can read those.
Let's just get right into it.
First one, the venerable pbgetcatinfo.
You're all familiar with this call,
I'm sure.
And when we were creating the Carbon API,
it was pretty much no question.
We couldn't get rid of pbgetcatinfo.
It would have just caused a huge upheaval
in people's source bases everywhere,
ours included.
And so there was just no choice.
We had to provide it.
It had to be compatible.
Unfortunately, we couldn't make it
performance compatible,
but that was a secondary concern
in the interest of getting
your apps onto 10 quickly.
The bad news is that PBGetCADinfo
is non-optimal on any file system.
That goes for 9 and for 10,
if you have file sharing on 9,
for example.
And for the most part,
it's overkill for all clients.
PBGetCADinfo just returns
a huge amount of data,
and the developer code out
there that uses PBGetCADinfo
ranges from using none of it,
in other words,
just checking an error code,
to maybe one field from this
enormous data structure.
Let's take a look at that data structure.
In fact, I couldn't even fit everything
that GetCatInfo returns to you.
It's just an enormous amount of stuff.
And, you know, when it came time to,
or back when PBGetCatInfo was first
created and exported as a system call,
it made perfect sense because
it was a great reflection of
the underlying volume format,
right?
On HFS disks,
the catalog information is stored
in one section of the disk.
It tends to be hot in the caches because
everyone is using the catalog files.
So PBGetCatInfo tends to be free.
And, well,
while you've paid the trap overhead,
you know, on a classic Mac OS system,
while you've paid the trap overhead
of making the call and getting into
the file system and what have you,
let's just return back
everything that we possibly can.
And guess what?
We did.
Of course, and everyone uses this call.
It's plenty fast on 9.
There aren't any real problems with it.
Problems slowly started creeping
in with file sharing again,
and things got much worse with 10.
Sort of as a graphical example
of how pbGitCatInfo works,
this is an optimal case right here.
This is with file sharing turned off.
This is on an HFS or an AFP disk.
In other words,
all the data that's given to you
in one pbGitCatInfo call is in
one contiguous part of the disk.
And lo and behold,
it fills in the param block in one shot.
Again, this is optimal.
Let's look at what happens with
pbgetcatinfo on other file systems.
With Mac OS X now,
we have the opportunity to
support plenty of other file
systems than we ever did before,
and it turns out that pbgetcatinfo
is just not a good reflection
of the underlying volume format.
In order to get some data,
we have to go to parts of the disk,
different parts of the disk.
And in fact,
a lot of those different parts of
the disk are completely disjoint,
which means you make one pbgetcatinfo
call on one of these file systems,
you're doing numerous I/O operations.
And I don't think I have
to say that that's bad,
potentially if this is
a network-based disk.
And as we move forward,
more of them will be.
[Transcript missing]
A good way to see exactly
what's going on as,
you know, when you make a request,
an FS Get Catalog Info call
to see what's going on under
the covers is to use FS Usage.
This is a tool that's on your
systems and it will be covered
in the Performance Tools talk.
I believe it's session 705
that John talked about earlier.
It's great to actually just
write a simple little app,
call FS Get Catalog Info with the
various bits that you are interested
in and just see what's happening.
Particularly on these other file systems,
you know,
something that's not HFS or AFP,
NFS or UFS.
UFS is probably the
most readily available.
So here's a quick little sample.
Given an FS ref,
tell me if this item is a folder.
Notice that the only bit that's
passed to the FS get catalog info
call is the FS cat info node flags,
because that's the only bit
that we're really interested in.
So on an NFS or a UFS file system,
that's all we have to worry about.
And we can do that in
one system call at most.
In fact, in a lot of cases,
we can do it in zero system calls.
And then, of course,
the field is anded and returned.
The next topic is volume iteration.
So when it came time to
create the Carbon API,
we were going through and pruning
out a lot of areas that we just
couldn't support in Carbon on OS X.
One of them was the low mem
to get at the VCB pointer.
A lot of Carbon apps,
or a lot of Mac OS apps,
saw this as a free way to
get access to all volumes,
to enumerate all volumes, with zero I/O.
And, you know, I don't have to tell you,
just in-memory copies are very fast,
very efficient.
However, when we created the Carbon API,
it was pretty clear that we
couldn't support direct VCB access.
And our recommendation was,
and continues to be,
to use one of the get
volume info type calls.
Specifically in the documentation,
we mentioned hgetvinfo.
However, the problems that we have
with pbgetcatinfo are the same
problems we have with pbhgetvinfo.
And it tends to be very expensive.
It returns a large parameter block.
For most uses,
you probably just don't care
about a lot of that information.
And exactly analogous
to fsgetcataloginfo,
there is an fsgetvoluminfo call.
Again, pass in the minimal
bitmap that you require,
and we will do the minimal I/O.
In a lot of cases,
it will just be an in-memory copy for us,
out to your param block,
and you do zero I/O.
The FSRef APIs are the primary APIs and
the preferred APIs in Carbon on OS X.
In fact, all of the major clients of
the file manager on OS X today,
the file manager, navigation services,
and Cocoa OpenSave,
all use the FSRef API and have actually
seen huge performance gains in doing so.
We've seen performance gains not just
on NFS and network-based file systems,
but in fact we've seen them
even on local HFS disks.
So it's definitely something
worth investigating.
So on to file I/O.
First thing I'd like to plug here is
what some of you probably recognize
as being a relatively old tech note.
I think it was put out in '93 or '92,
I'm not really sure.
File Manager Performance and Caching.
Turns out a lot of the lessons
that are taught in that tech
note are relevant today,
and I highly recommend that
you go back and read that.
Some of the biggest points in it,
of course, are to use large page-aligned
I/O wherever you can.
If you're picking through
little bits of data in a file,
don't push that down to the file manager
or the file system and don't pay the
system call overhead just because
you're doing little bitty writes.
Do larger page-aligned I/O into
preferably page-aligned buffers
and you'll get the maximum
throughput from the file system,
a lot of times without even having to
do copies from the kernel buffer if you
pass those page-aligned buffers as well.
Again,
let me put in another plug for FS Usage.
This is a great place to look,
and you can actually see exactly
where reads are coming through,
writes are going through,
and how much data is actually
being read per read or write.
This will help you identify quickly
where you're spending a lot of your
time doing a lot of small I/Os.
The next point is don't
pollute the cache.
This is covered in the
Performance Tech Note,
and it's something that a
lot of clients overlook,
and it really shouldn't be because
it tends to pay off in big wins.
What I mean by not polluting the
cache is you as the app developers
know exactly what your usage
pattern is going to be for any bit
of data or large chunks of data.
you know that if you're streaming in,
if you're importing a file that you're
just not going to look at again,
say you're importing from some
foreign file format into your
own internal representation,
you're just not going to go back
to that file again to do the read.
And if you're talking
about a multi-megabyte or,
you know,
it doesn't even have to be that big,
multiple hundreds of K file,
if you just do reads without
passing the no-cache mask,
what you're actually doing is filling
the buffer cache with data that you
know that you're never going to read.
Turns out that by passing
the no-cache mask,
you're not actually hurting yourself,
you're not hurting your throughput by
doing those fresh reads from these files,
but by...
bit to these writes you're not going
to pollute the users buffer cache and
in fact you're not going to pay any
performance penalty by passing the no
cache bit you're just going to make it
an overall better experience I think a
big reason why this isn't used so often
is because it doesn't look like it's
a performance game in other words when
you go and change your code it's really
hard to see the benefit of this the
reads that you're doing are just as fast
the rights that you were doing are just
as fast and if you're not if you haven't
evicted pages from the buffer cache
that you really cared about you're just
not going to notice but it is still very
important and I strongly encourage you to
to look at to look hard at where you're
doing IO and what kind of IO you're
doing and pass the no cache mask where
you can internally just a couple examples
of where we use it are when we're doing
finder copies the finder is doing a
copy of the no cache but it's not going
to be able to see the no cache but it's
not going to be able to see the no cache
but it's not going to be able to see
the no cache of a folder from A to B it
knows the finder itself knows it's never
gonna or it's very likely that it's
not going to look at that data again
unless the user requests it so there's
no reason to flood the entire buffer
cache with these copied blocks instead
the users data can stay intact and the
finder copy can execute just as quickly
as it did before the other area is in
iTunes when it's encoding a file or
ripping a file from CD and writing out to
disk iTunes itself knows that the chances
are very slim that it's going to actually
go back and read those pages again so
it passes the no cache mask and it turns
out that because of that the use the user
experience on 10 is a little bit better
even though it's kind of hard to really
quantify that and look at it you kind
of just have to know that it's better and
know that you're doing the right thing
Okay, writing large files.
One common technique that has sort of
been passed down from generation to
generation is when you're writing a large
file to first do a set EOF or an FSSet
fork size to the final length of the file
that you're actually writing and then
back up and start filling in the data.
This has a couple of advantages and
this is why it's been done over time.
First of all,
it is a good pre-flight to allow you
to know whether or not you have space
on the disk to actually do the IO.
And then second, it's also a good way to
reserve a portion of the disk,
a hopefully contiguous
portion of the disk,
so that when you go back and
you're actually doing your writes,
you know that you're writing
to contiguous parts of the disk
and subsequent reads of that
document or that data offer.
for the disk will be fast.
The problem is on OS X,
for security purposes,
when you extend a file,
what we do is we zero fill the entire
file from the current EOF out to
the very end where you extend it.
And the reason we do that, of course,
is security.
We don't want some malicious
program to run on your disk,
reserve as much space as possible,
and then potentially sniff through
looking for social security numbers or
credit card numbers or what have you.
So this is why we do the zero fill.
Of course,
it has the downside of producing
double I/Os in this very common
usage of the file manager.
The double I/Os come from first when we
do the zero fill of that extended area,
and then later on when you
actually do your write.
If you write a little
app on OS X right now,
that all it does is just
create and open a file and then
just do a set EOF of a gig.
You'll notice that before
that set EOF returns,
your disk will be buzzing away,
and when you go and do a subsequent read,
you'll see that it is all zero filled,
and that's exactly
what I'm talking about.
We're looking at ways to
fix this in the near future,
but the truth of it is
we've shipped this way.
This is already on customers' disks,
so it's something that you
should probably address now.
And fortunately,
there are a couple of ways
that you can address it.
You can use the PBAllocate call.
This does not have the
zero-filling behavior.
However, it does allow you to reserve
a portion of the disk for a
contiguous file on the disk.
Or the other thing you
can do is just write.
Just start writing.
If you're not doing,
as long as you're not doing
set EOFs followed by a write,
you won't get this double I/O.
If you're just doing writes
past the end of the file,
then that's enough of a trigger to
the file system that any subsequent
reads are just going to pick
up that data that was written,
so we don't need to zero fill,
and we don't.
Finally, file assumptions.
I couldn't think of a
better topic for this,
or heading for this slide,
so I just put this.
Since the beginning
of personal computers,
we've been able to make some
assumptions about the layout of
disks and the layout of hardware and
usage patterns and things like that.
And as we move forward,
more and more of those assumptions
will prove to be false or can prove
to be false under certain situations.
One of these assumptions, of course,
is that your disks or the user disk
is locally attached to the machine,
that all user data is
coming off of a local disk,
all preferences are coming
off of a local disk,
and in fact,
document directories and things
like that are on local disks.
Well,
networks are getting faster all the time.
Pretty much right now,
they're fast enough
that in some situations,
you can actually create an environment
on the disk where user preferences,
user documents,
and various other bits of data are
actually stored on a network-backed disk,
and it provides lots of benefits.
In fact, we have this all set
up at Apple right now,
where users can log into their machines.
You log in in one workstation,
let's just call it.
And you log in with your
username and your password.
All of your preferences
come up on that one machine.
You can use your documents just
as you were maybe in your office,
or do whatever you want to.
You get all your same preferences.
You go back to your office,
all of your preferences are updated,
because everything is on the network.
It's a beautiful thing, this sharing.
And as we move forward,
it's going to be one of those
things that a lot more users
are going to be exposed to.
Thank you.
But it does mean some serious
considerations for your applications.
In other words,
preferences and documents and
things like that are no longer
going to be backed by local disk.
And this can have impacts on
your code base that you're
probably not even aware of.
Just because when you're coding or
designing with some assumptions in mind,
a lot of times you're not even aware
you're making those assumptions.
And you'll tend to do things like,
let's say, "Oh,
I know that I'm bringing this
data down off the network and
I need to cache it somewhere.
Let me cache it in the
preferences directory." Or,
"Let me cache it to a temp file
in the documents directory." Well,
if those directories are
backed by a network volume,
you're really not buying much
by caching something off the
network to another network volume.
Or, this is a lot more common scenario,
when you launch your app,
you're doing tiny little
I/Os to the preferences file,
and this has never been a problem
because it's a local disk.
It's very fast.
Well, if it's a network disk,
that's a big window that you can stall
in and your users will definitely notice.
Trust me, we've noticed at Apple,
and we've been working with developers
where we can to point out what's going
on and help them work through it.
But the best thing that you can
do is try to set up one of these
hostile test environments in your
own offices and see for yourself.
One of the best examples of this is to
set up an NFS-based user directory and
log into that user and just double-click
your app and see what happens.
Or double-click your app with FS usage
running alongside and see what happens.
You'll notice that if you're logged in as
either a local user or as a network user,
a lot of times you'll notice a great
variation in the performance of your app,
and a lot of that can be attributed
to some of these design decisions.
The good news is that anything
that you fix for the network case
will also benefit the local case.
So if you're working off
of maybe slower media,
or maybe not, say you're just working
off of fast media,
you can reduce the number of system
calls that you're making and speed
things up even in your local scenario.
So it's definitely a good thing to do.
Look into doing and
check the Mac OS X server
documentation for more details.
And with that,
I'll bring John back up on stage.
Talk about watching the
application bounce a lot.
Those network users, when you have your
system set up that way.
We typically see two or three
times the number of bounces
we do in a local directory.
It's really something I advise.
Take Nitin's advice on that one.
Okay, you've learned all of the details
about what you can do to help
with your file system performance.
I'm going to talk a little
bit now about your CPU usage.
The first thing I'd like to say is
You're running on a preemptive
multitasking system,
but it's not magic.
It doesn't give you more than 100%
of the CPU on a single CPU system.
It can't give you free cycles.
Matter of fact,
basically the gain is that one
single thread on that system is not
going to take over the whole system.
It's not going to bring
the system to its knees.
So if you have a hundred
threads that all need to run,
they're all sitting there,
have something to do,
even if it's very little,
the scheduler has to
take them into account.
That's why we talk about making
sure that your threads are blocked.
That CPU is still a limited resource.
So make sure when you're
using threads or timers,
cooperative threads,
that you're taking this into account.
The best tools on the system
to really look at this are
a top time and CPU monitor.
CPU monitor you've probably
seen in some of the demos.
I would advise just keep that thing
running as you're doing development.
Just keep it off,
maybe on a second monitor.
It'll show you very easily when
there's a little bit of a CPU peak
and you can go in and see,
is that your problem or not?
Typically, that is a great indicator for
when you have CPU bound problems.
Top is another one that you could
run because it shows you a little
bit more than just CPU usage.
Both of those I would encourage
as you're just doing your
ongoing development on your app.
Keep them running in some window
as clues to the possibility
of a performance problem.
So, responsiveness.
This is the next area after launching
file system and CPU usage that
I would encourage you to look into.
Mostly things to do with responsiveness.
You should be able to fix up fairly
quickly by just taking a quick
look at what your app is doing.
[Transcript missing]
The biggest indicator that you're
not doing event handling right is
probably that you're pegging the CPU.
You've seen this in some demos.
The best and simplest workaround
for that is maybe look around.
If your app is showing this behavior,
if it's CPU bound, during tracking,
during interaction with your UI.
Take a look.
Use Sampler,
which is a tool that lets you
actually pinpoint where in
your code the problem lies.
Search your code.
Search your code for
still down and button.
And look at how you're using -- how
you're calling these older calls that
we really would rather you get off of.
Track mouse location is your friend.
That's what you want to be using.
That's the basic primitive for
letting you do all sorts of tracking
in the UI that blocks intelligently.
So after event handling-- oh,
in addition to those tools,
I would encourage you to
look on a developer CD.
There's an application
called Appearance Sample,
which has almost every
widget the toolbox supports,
every control you've ever seen.
Go and play with that app.
Run CPU Monitor.
You'll see all of those
controls block well.
That's what your app should do.
If you're seeing different
behavior in your app,
it's either a problem in that you've
done your own kind of handling,
your own custom control,
or potentially in the way
that you're using the toolbox.
The next area that contributes
to your app's responsiveness,
you know,
maybe it feels a little sluggish.
Maybe everything else is looking good.
Your file system performance
in your launch is good,
but when you activate Windows,
things don't appear as snappy as they do,
say, online.
That's probably an indication
that you have a drawing problem.
The best tool for that is Quartz Debug.
You've probably seen it in
some of the other sessions.
It should be in the
Performance Tool session as well.
Because it'll let you see when
you're doing redundant drawing,
when you're drawing the
same things over and over.
The other typical pitfall that
we've seen is people back buffering,
doing their own double buffering
for their drawing when the system
is already doing that for them.
So make sure you check the port using QD,
is port buffered, and if it is,
then you don't have to do
that buffering yourself.
That's being done for you.
The next area on responsiveness
has to do with flushing.
Because you have a back buffer,
it means there has to be a time
when you actually get those bits
in a back buffer to the screen.
Generally,
you should try to avoid flushing.
The system will do flushing for
you basically on event boundaries.
It'll try to do that as
intelligently as possible.
So you shouldn't have to flush.
The two examples of exceptions are when
you're doing some kind of animation,
you want that to get to
the screen right now,
or when you're not really
involved with events at all,
the splash screen case.
Those are good uses of explicit flushing.
Otherwise, let the system do it for you.
Another common performance problem area
is with regards to window resizing.
This also has to do with the
back buffer and the design
of the window system on OS X.
Basically,
our advice there is to try to do this all
in one fell swoop with set window bounds,
instead of trying to use size window
and move window in combination.
That's what that call exists for,
to optimize those cases.
Also, the other thing that we've seen
with regard to Windows is pervasive
or heavy use of invisible Windows.
Windows are generally
more expensive on OS X.
The back buffer,
in addition the overhead,
the interaction with the core
graphics system in the Windows Server.
You may have invisible Windows.
That doesn't mean that
they don't cost anything.
That manipulating invisible
Windows doesn't come for free.
As a matter of fact,
I would look into why you're
using invisible Windows.
It is often the case that
you can ditch that window,
dispose it, create a new one,
and redraw faster than you can by
twiddling that invisible window.
The last one I wasn't going
to put on here at all,
but I figured I would try
some of the tools and look at
various apps a couple days ago.
And I just happened to notice that one
of the apps that I use every day was
doing file I/O when I activated a window.
And I'm sitting here scratching my head,
trying to figure this out.
And it's just a bug.
But this is one of those things
that you probably wouldn't notice
unless you're running a tool that
tells you that that's happening.
FS Usage is perfect for that.
FS Usage lets you basically see
the file I/O that's going on in the
whole system and a particular app.
You can filter things out.
Another use if you're
really going after file,
anything in particular, is Sampler,
which lets you tie the usage
pattern back to your code.
Okay, pulling versus blocking.
I'm sure you've heard this
a lot in various talks.
I'm going to talk a little bit about some
of the more atypical situations in which
you find polling affecting performance.
WaitNext Event is
actually pretty typical,
but the fallout of using WaitNext Event 0
is where we sometimes see some problems.
So just to make sure we're
all on the same page here,
you really shouldn't be
using WaitNext Event 0.
The very simple way to get rid of the
WaitNext Event 0 is if you have something
that you want to do periodically,
set a Carbon event timer to do
it with the frequency that you
need and use WaitNext Event.
Very long time now.
Time and tick count.
It's something that
surprised a few of us,
basically, that we did some performance
profiling and various apps show
up that tick count is taking up
a significant amount of time.
And one of the reasons is that tick
count costs more than Adonis on OS 9.
But it's also used all over the
place in a lot of UI in places where
it really doesn't have to be used.
First of all,
we're talking about something
that's fairly coarse-grained,
right?
Ticks, 60ths of a second.
Calling it more often than 60 times
a second doesn't make a lot of sense.
So the best advice I have for you here
is to try to use the event system.
Try to use the timestamps that are in
events and look at events like that.
There's often comparisons
made to the time now.
That can get you out of polling
essentially for tick count and have it
show up in being a performance problem.
Another often asked for bit of
information is the volume list.
Nitin went through earlier how to
do that as efficiently as possible.
But I think it's a pretty rare case
where you actually need the volume list.
I would suggest you just get
rid of that code altogether or
figure out what you really need.
If you're trying to find out
about new volumes or if you're
trying to find out about volumes
that have just been unmounted,
register yourself for a Carbon event
for volume mount and unmount.
Ask the system to tell you about it
instead of periodically going out
and looking at all the volumes and
trying to figure out what happened.
Same kind of thing goes for
preference change notifications.
There's a theme change app event.
There's various new Carbon events
that let you know about things.
Actually, up on the volume slider,
I should probably also have
another bullet for processes.
If you're trying to find out what process
just got launched or what process died,
there's a Carbon event for that as well.
Generally,
we've been really looking at the
system to try to find out if there's
any legitimate need to do polling.
The answer should be no.
We're trying to notify you of everything
that you might find of interest.
It's a much better solution on OS X.
So if you guys see things that you
still think you have to poll for,
let us know about it.
We'll figure out a better way to do it.
And on this final note,
maybe some of you have heard this
bit in the application packaging and
document binding presentation yesterday.
We need notification too,
particularly in the parts of the system
that present the file system visually.
So in the finder, in nav services,
in the open save panel,
those are showing you
the file system objects.
They're not polling.
We don't poll.
So we need you guys to,
if you participate in this kind of thing,
if you're an installer or if
you're copying files to a place
that is likely to be visible,
to use the FN notify call.
FN notify is a 10 only API.
It's in files.h.
Basically says something happened,
something changed in this directory.
It takes an FS ref.
It lets us know that something
changed and we should refresh
the contents of that directory.
in any UI elements that care.
Do this intelligently.
If you're copying a whole bunch
of files to a single directory,
let us know when you're done
with that copy operation,
not at every file.
Okay, resource manager use.
The resource manager is very
tied to the file manager.
So in essence,
I could just repeat what Nitin said
earlier about the file manager.
But, um,
It's actually worse in that the
resource file format was designed
way before VM systems were really
commercial like they are now.
And really the file format is not
designed for a VM system in that
there's a resource map in one
part of the file and resource data
in the other part of the file.
And there's no way around going to
both places every time you need data.
You're asking for a resource.
You have to go look up where the resource
is in the file in the resource map.
That's at least one I/O.
Then you've got to go to where
it told you the resource was.
That's a second I/O.
Okay, that's bad enough.
Then you look at what's in a
typical resource file and you
see lots of little resources.
[Transcript missing]
Coalescing of your resources.
If you have resources that, for example,
stir resources that could
be combined in a stir pound,
it's a much better use
of the Resource Manager.
Going and reading eight bytes out of
the Resource Manager is about one of the
most expensive kinds of I/O you can do.
The other thing that we see
with regards to resources,
particularly in the use of plug-ins,
is enumerating your plug-ins,
opening up their resource files
to find out something about them.
Opening and closing the same files
is a pattern that we've seen and
we'd really like you to avoid that.
Perhaps what you can do
is cache that and open,
you know, cache the results in
one file and open that.
Minimally,
make sure that you just do that
scan once when you actually have
to find out about your plugins.
And then for historical reasons,
just lots of calls to update res file,
which writes out the map and the
data for your resource forks.
Just kind of call it willy-nilly.
It's more like a flush
from people's minds,
and that causes I/O.
Okay, the last bullet item on here is
something that we added to OS X,
basically a feature in the
Resource Manager to kind of help
out with these sets of problems.
What we did is add a new key to your
Info.plist called CSResourceFileMapped.
And if you set this, it's a Boolean key,
if you set this to true,
it'll change the behavior of the
resource manager with respect
to your application's resources.
What it'll do is it'll open them up,
read only, okay, you can't write to them,
and it'll file map them.
And then there's some support
in the memory manager.
to support file mapping so that
we don't have to allocate for the
data that's in your resource fork,
which saves on your memory footprint.
And because it's all file mapped now,
we get a lot better
characteristics of I/O because,
yes, we're still hitting that resource
map and we're still hitting the data,
but there's some locality there.
When we go to the resource
map the second time,
it's likely to be on the same page.
And when we go for data,
if you're going through
data of a certain type,
this will depend on the
organization of the data,
it's likely that we're going
to get some good win there.
The only caveat to this,
and the reason why we didn't
turn this behavior on by default,
is that it'll break some of your code.
At the point where you say, "Yes,
turn this on," then all of the
resource handles that you get back,
essentially the pointers in them,
point to read-only memory.
If you try to modify that,
your application is going to crash.
So there's plenty of folks who
have just turned this on and
don't write back to the resources,
right?
I mean, in general, particularly the
application resource file,
you probably don't want to write to
because it might be living on a CD,
it might be reading on a network
volume that other people are using.
In general, it's bad practice.
But let's say you were writing
things to the resource but not
actually flushing them out to file.
You can still do that.
By detaching the resource,
thereby getting an in-memory copy,
mess with the copy,
and everything else
still works correctly.
So this is something that you have
to turn on yourself and it's fairly
straightforward to debug because
it basically leads to crashes.
And if you have any questions about
exactly what the Info P-List is,
I would recommend looking
at Tech Note 2013.
Okay, the next section is memory usage.
This can be a real big problem on 10,
largely because of the big
difference between the memory models,
in that you just have a very
large and sparse address space.
For example, just right off the bat,
you could accidentally allocate,
you know,
order magnitude off what you intended
to allocate and not even know it.
The system will give it to you.
Memful errors are relatively
rare on this system.
And that could be a problem.
So in order to keep on top of this,
I really would recommend getting
familiar with both the leaks
and the malloc debug tools.
Leaks in particular you
want to keep an eye on.
You may not notice the performance
necessarily so much in your app.
It may be that a slow leak over time,
but it really does affect what's going
on underneath the covers in that,
you know, you don't get reuse of
the same memory blocks.
It'll lead to paging.
It'll lead to general
bad characterizations.
It'll lead to your app
generally feeling sluggish.
Aside from leaks,
I would really recommend that
you get a good handle on the
size of your application.
Particularly,
make sure your tools are doing
the work that they should for you.
Make sure that
Things that are actually constant in your
application end up in the right section
so that they don't get-- so that the
OS takes the maximum advantage of that.
We went through a lot of the
Carbon frameworks early on and
got a lot of gains by doing this.
Basically marking strings and other
constant sections as constant so
that they show up in a text section
that gets shared across the system.
Same thing goes for your app.
The third thing on memory usage
is there's really been a reversal
in terms of handles and pointers.
On OS 9, the handle was really
the first class citizen.
It was designed to work with that
limited application partition,
that heap,
and it was designed to be reused
inside that limited space.
On 10, the reverse is the case.
Pointers are really the
first class citizens and
there's some cost to handles.
So in performance critical code,
look at rewriting to use
pointers instead of handles.
We found one case where
Just removal of HLock and HUnlock
in this code path made a big
difference in terms of performance.
The reason there was that
The locking costs are sufficiently
higher on 10 than they are on 9.
And what work had to be done
was really impacted by that.
And this is something that you
should do kind of carefully.
The OS itself-- I mean,
if you're looking into this
kind of an optimization,
the OS itself doesn't rely or
doesn't go and purge and move
handles out from under you.
That's really under your control on 10.
And so if you know that
you're not resizing the handle
somewhere else in your code,
if you know that you're not looking
at the handle to see if it's locked,
then you're likely able to make
this kind of an optimization.
Then lastly, I hope it's pretty obvious,
is there's really no purging.
The calls are still there.
They're largely there so you can
run the same app on both 9 and 10.
But your purge procs are
not going to get called.
The application heap is
not going to fill up.
And if you're relying
on basically allocating,
allocating, allocating until you get
called in your purge proc,
that's not going to happen.
That's the biggest
leak you can ever have.
So take a look at that if you're
in that kind of a category.
Okay, code loading.
This is something that kind of referred
to earlier on in launching a bit in
that I said something to the effect
of defer some of the things that
you do at launch time to later on.
And one of the ways in which you
can do this is to factor your app.
Most application code bases start
off and are organized basically by
the people that work on them first.
So you get Kelly's feature and Mary's
feature and John's feature and they go
off and do those different pieces of it.
And then Nitin comes along and
he has a new feature to add.
And pretty soon you've got one
little piece of code that you
can add to your application.
And then you add the rest of the app,
whether it's a shared
library or a plug-in,
for each person that's working on it.
And soon those features grow
up and there's a whole team
around each of those features.
And before you know it,
the organization of your app
looks a little bit like the
organization -- your organization,
right?
And that's rarely the best
organization in terms of performance.
You really want to look at the features
in terms of what the app really needs.
Probably want to look at
layering and dependencies.
So factoring in your app in
terms of performance is something
that I would advise you to do.
It's usually not something
that you would do quickly.
It's something you probably
converge on over time.
Look at plugins for things
that are truly optional.
Again, I don't mean this is optional in
the sense no one would use it.
An example of this in the RealLive
OS is nav services and printing.
Those are both good categories from the
OS's point of view of services that are
purely optional in that the application,
your application, can run fine,
do lots of good work,
and never interact with
nav services or printing.
So why should they pay the cost up front?
The answer is that it shouldn't.
So look for those kind of
opportunities in your app.
Maybe there's a plug-in that
has all the bells and whistles
that you could ever want,
but you only use it once in a blue moon.
Factor that out so you don't
pay any costs for that.
Don't give that plug-in
an initial load and say,
are you happy with things?
That'll cost.
Then finally, look at your libraries,
look at the number of
libraries that you're using.
Libraries, when backed by files,
are costs.
They're costs all the
way down to kernels.
The kernel has a fixed cost.
There's a per process cost.
If your tools support it,
take libraries and combine them together.
Merge your PEF libraries
together into one big file.
That's infinitely better
from a performance and
resource use point of view.
Okay, in the async I/O space,
we've seen some problems that
are kind of interesting in the
combination of async I/O and threading.
Asynchronous I/O on 10.
By that I mean deferred task,
file manager, time manager.
Those are all implemented based
on running the operation in
question synchronously on a thread
that the OS creates for you.
Particularly when used with cooperative
threads or were used combined,
there's additional costs there.
In general, this is not performing as
well as the equivalent on 9.
This is a case where I would recommend
continuing to do async I/O and
chain completion routines on 9,
factoring your app and
dynamically checking,
and doing something
entirely different on 10.
The simplest workaround or the simplest
solution on 10 is really just to use
threading in a synchronous I/O model.
And then just a data point we ran
with one of-- there was an app or
two that we've seen that implement
threaded packages-- threading
packages on top of the Time Manager.
The Time Manager is itself
implemented as a thread.
Which means you're threading on top of
a thread that's scheduled by the kernel,
which is you're trying to run threads
on top of something that's already
being managed by something else.
Not a good performance solution.
In the context of cooperative threads,
there's one basic flaw
with cooperative threads.
And that is that in order for
cooperative threads to get scheduled,
you have to yield,
and there's no blocking going on.
So by their very nature,
cooperative threads are compute bound.
That's the biggest problem.
They're still there because we know
you have code that depends on it.
I would really look at not
using cooperative threads
or potentially using timers,
Carbon event timers instead,
or moving your code off to MP threads.
Often there's a performance problem with
regards to messaging between threads.
This usually has to do with
messaging as opposed to,
or polling to see if some message-based
thing is complete versus true messaging.
And there I would just encourage,
if you're doing things
with multiple threads,
even across processes,
make sure that you're not getting
in a situation where both of
the threads are competing.
The case in the data point that
I have was basically one thread
was doing a lot of file I/O and
was reading and writing to a file.
The first thread was basically
looking to see if it was done.
And the cleaner solution to that and the
better performing solution is basically
have the second thread just block and
when the file I/O thread is completed,
just send it a Carbon event to
get that whole thing to work well.
And then finally,
seeing situations where basically
people just go thread happy.
They have just way too many threads
for no real apparent reason.
And just bear in mind that each one
of those threads has a real cost.
There's a wired memory cost in
the kernel and they're not free.
So use them diligently.
And then finally,
threading in general can be used to
really help out with performance.
I would say look,
particularly look for things like
when you're trying to do a safe
save or a fast save kind of feature.
That's a very good use of a thread.
You can create the thread,
do the work on it, and dispose it.
A network listener is another
model that works really well
where the thread is just basically
listening for incoming activity.
And occasionally there's good use
for threading when you're doing low
priority idle kinds of computation.
Maybe you're indexing
something in the background,
something like that.
Okay, so we're finally at the summary.
Really want to encourage you to
factor performance into your planning.
Try to really make it be a
feature of your application.
We want that killer app to be that
much better by performing well.
Performance isn't a one-shot deal.
You really have to keep
it in your workflow.
You've got to keep on top of it.
Ideally, you would, you know,
with different builds of your app,
try to capture data about that,
about how it performs and see
and pinpoint where performance
problems were introduced.
And then I really encourage
you to get into the tools.
The tools talk is later
on this afternoon.
And all those tools are on the system.
You should just become experts at them.
Those tools allow you to look
at your app in various different
ways and they're really helpful
in pinpointing these problems.
And lastly,
just go after those performance problems.
All right, so now,
Let's see.
Oh yeah, one last thing.
So the first one,
the Carbon Developer Documentation,
you should just generally know.
The second one, if you're not ready to do
anything with performance at all,
you're stuck behind a whole bunch of,
you know, couple months worth of
features on your app,
you're still carbonizing,
anything like that, at the very least,
remember this second URL up here,
that performance PDF file has a
lot of information on performance.
A lot of what I've gone over and
what we'll be going over in other
sessions is in that one document.
Okay, I'd like to bring
Mark up and then we can,
he'll do the road map and
then we'll head off to Q&A.
Thank you, John.
There we go.
That one worked.
Okay.
So as John mentioned,
we'd like you all to attend the
Performance Tools session at
5:00 today if you possibly can.
We're going to talk about the various
tools that he introduced you to.
And also, because we don't have a lot of
time right now to take questions,
I'd ask you to take your
questions to that session,
and we'll have some of the same
people there to answer them.
But we'll just take a couple right now,
so if we can bring up our Q&A panel,
we can do maybe two or three questions.
Oh, by the way, this is me.
If during or after the conference
you have any questions or comments
about Carbon or Carbon Performance,
send them to me at this address.